Welcome back everyone.
Here we are where we left off last time.
We already have our time series generator and our data is scaled.
Let's go ahead and now create the model.
Well first start off of a couple of imports.
We'll save from tensor flow that carries the models.
We will import the sequential model that we've always been working with and then we'll import our specific
layers from tensor flow that cares that layers will import dense and Ellis.
Now we're only using one feature in our time series essentially the previous sales data.
So the number of features right now is just equal to one.
And let's create our model we'll see a model is equal to sequential and then we're going to add in our
else Tam layer.
And typically you can go pretty large with the number of neurons in this Ellis Tam layer we'll go ahead
and do 100 and then we can also play around with things like activation functions.
So previously we left a default activation function.
That's also something you can do.
But I do want to show you that if you do want to edit the activation function for an A-list him you
can say activation and set it to something like rectified linear unit.
So that's another aspect of an Alice TAM that you can play around with.
And if you do shift tab here to check out the doc string you can also do lots of other things like set
initialize hours regularization et cetera.
And we'll talk about regularization and constraints later on in the course.
And what's really nice here is you can also set dropouts OK.
So right now we're keeping things simple this dataset is actually pretty straightforward so we don't
need anything fancy to get a pretty good forecast.
The thing that we do need to make sure that we get correct here and this is something that you don't
have options for as the input shape the input shape should be the length of the batch by the number
of features and then after that we also need to make sure that we add a final dense layer to have one
final predictive output and let's go ahead just compile all this will choose the optimizer to be Adam.
So we'll say optimizer is equal to an atom optimizer and the loss should be for a continuous variable
since we're working on continuous sales data and that will go ahead and be mean squared error.
And then let's get our model summary and there's our sequential model.
Okay.
Now as I mentioned before recurrent neural networks often take a really long time to train and they
take many epochs for training.
So it be nice here is to create an early stopping mechanism so I can just set an arbitrarily high number
of epochs and let tensor flow do the work of figuring out when to stop training.
We'll do that just as we did before by saying from tensor flow that carries that callbacks import early
stopping and then let's create our early stop callback and that will be early stopping and what we're
going to be monitoring here is our validation loss and for this particular case especially for current
neural networks.
I would recommend just having a little more patients than the default.
So recall that if we take a look at what patients actually represents it's a number of epochs we want
to wait beyond after which no improvement.
So it's a number of epochs of no improvement after which training will be stopped recurrent narrow networks
can definitely be pretty noisy in the first couple of epochs.
So it's probably a good idea to not have the default patients is zero because it's very likely to end
training probably a little too soon.
So I will go ahead and say wait for at least two epochs OK so we have our early stop and it's time to
create our validation generator recall since we're running fit generator.
The validation set that's going to be passed in during training also needs to be a generator.
So we'll see our validation generator is just before a time series generator.
Except now it's on the scaled test data.
So the skill test data is bought is both the source of our X and or Y the length should be the same
as our training set and the batch size is going to be the same as well.
Okay.
So it's essentially a carbon copy of our previous time series generator except this time we're going
to be passing in this test data.
That way we can then have our validation lost during training and early stop if we need to.
Then the last step is to fit our generator.
So we'll save it generator passin generator which is our training generator and then we'll go and choose
a large number of epochs hopefully doesn't need to train for that many.
And then our validation data is equal to the validation generator that we just created.
And then finally we want to make sure that we don't forget to add in our callbacks which is going to
allow us to commit to an early stop here.
So go ahead and run that.
Make sure you don't get any typos here and there we can see it's running.
So on my computer it took about eight epochs of training.
So I will fast forward the time until this is done training.
Okay.
Finished training my model.
So this time it took a little further and it went to eleven epochs.
Let's go ahead and visualize the losses
we can do this by saying the data frame and then passing and model history that history and then simply
say losses plot and we can see here are loss in our validation loss.
So it looks like we got quite a bit of noise and then we went back down to our original value that was
kind of our minimum here around eight epochs.
So as I mentioned in the beginning the training can be quite noisy.
So it's probably better to have a little more patience now too much patience and you'll probably start
getting too much noise and and too late.
So keep in mind it is a bit of a balance there.
OK.
So let's actually see on some test data how he performed.
So to do this or we're going to do is I'm going to copy and paste the same for loop that we created
last time.
So if you have any questions on this make sure to check out the previous lecture but we're using the
exact same for loop that we used in the previous training lecture.
So I'm going to go over it here.
But again the full detailed explanation is in the previous lecture but I have my test predictions going
to start off as an empty list and then I need to figure out.
Well my first training batch.
What's it going to look like.
It's the very last batch points from my scaled training set.
Recall that the length of my batches is 12 months.
So I'm going to grab what is essentially the last 12 months of my training set to predict one month
into the future which by definition then is the first point in my test set.
So that's my first evaluation batch that I need to make sure to reshape it to the correct format that
is expected by my recurrent neural network because I'm passing in just one item per batch and then it's
12 months by one y feature.
So I reshape it to that format and then I have my current batch then what I'm going to do is for the
entire length of my test set.
In this case I get the prediction one timestamp ahead.
So zero is just grabbing that number.
So I predict one timestamp ahead.
I get my current prediction I append my current prediction to test predictions and then when I'm going
to do is this indexing right here drops the very first value in that current batch and then I append
my current prediction value essentially moving the current batch one month into the future.
And as we keep moving into the future I'm have more and more predictions.
Essentially predicting off predictions.
So that's what a true forecast is.
Let's go ahead and run this and again I would recommend that you just directly get this from our notebooks
really easy to make typos here and then what we'll do is we have our test predictions values but recall
they're scaled.
So we need to do is inverse that transformation.
So we'll say scalar inverse transform on my test predictions and set that to I'll call my true predictions.
Basically my predictions at the correct scaling.
So we run that we get our test and I'll say my predictions is equal to my true predictions and you may
get a warning here it's basically just telling you hey you're overwriting test that already exists you
can completely ignore this warning there's actually a whole caveat link to the documentation on this
warning but you can completely ignore it it's totally OK and now when we check out our test we have
our true sales data and then our predictions.
Let's go ahead and see how these lineup on a plot to see how far off we are.
So say test plot fake size is equal to twelve by eight.
Go ahead and run that.
And if we take a look our predictions they look pretty good.
Granted they're not perfect but given the fact that at the end we're essentially forecasting off forecasts.
The general seasonality trends do tend to line up and keep in mind that this network doesn't actually
have a true understanding of things like December is a holiday.
So there should be a lot of clothing sales.
Instead it's learning based off the previous cycles what the trends should be so it's kind of impressive
the fact that the network is able to perform this well at all.
OK.
So another thing you can experiment with is trying to use the default activation functions of Alice
Tams instead of setting it to a rectified linear unit and see if that improves your results.
So there's lots of different options you can play with removing or adding more neurons with LSD and
layers et cetera.
But let's go ahead and try to forecast into the unknown future.
So what we'll do is we'll retrain on all our data and then again we'll do our scaling do a retraining
and then we'll do a true forecast.
So right now recall that these blue values are values that we actually know the true results for.
So if we decide that Hey this is good enough to essentially forecast values then what we do into the
future.
So we'll say forecast actually before we do that when you actually start scaling our data.
So I will say my full scalar is equal to men Max scalar and I will scale my entire dataset will say
my full scale data is equal to full scalar dot.
And here I can fit transform to all my data since the quote unquote forecast section doesn't really
exist for me.
So say fit transform def.
OK so now my data frame is fully transformed.
So now I have the scale the full data we'll use the same batches before say length is equal to twelve
and then say generator here is equal to a time series generator and then we'll pass on my skillful data
it in twice because it's both the source of our X and our y the length is equal to length and then the
batch size is equal to one okay.
So there's our new generator.
It's time to add in our model.
So we create a sequential model I can add in assuming that I was satisfied with the model before.
Let's go ahead and just use the exact same one.
And I'm not going to make claims here.
That's the best model possible.
In fact I would encourage you to play around with it.
But the results were pretty reasonable given our plot.
So we'll go ahead and just say input shape is equal to length by and features and then we'll say dance
is one and we'll go ahead and compile this.
So say optimizer is equal to Adam and then say loss is equal to mean squared error and then we'll say
model fit generator
is equal to generator and now I have to choose a number of epochs.
Now a really common question I get from students at this phase is how many epochs should I be choosing.
And why can't I just do an early stop.
Call back again when I'm forecasting into the unknown future after retraining on my entire dataset.
And it's a bit tricky to answer but let's just think about what we want to do recall if we come back
up here the way the early stopping works is it evaluates your validation loss.
Recall that that validation generator is validating your model and evaluating your model on data that
the model does not get to train on.
However by definition for this forecast we're training on the full data.
So there is no chunk of data that we're setting aside that is fair game for evaluation because the model
gets to see all the data at once.
So it's a bit of a catch 22 because if you tried to implement an early stopping right now by passing
in some sort of validation generator it's not going to be a very evaluation because you'll have to actually
use some portion of data that your model is being trained on.
And then if you decide to actually set that data apart then you're basically doing what we did before
which was forecasting into a known test set.
And what we really want to do is take advantage now of our full dataset assuming that we're satisfied
by the performance against the test set.
And this is what makes time series forecasting different than typical regression models that we saw
earlier such as the regression model for pricing House data.
It's the fact that we're forecasting into the unknown future so we should be using all the data right
up to the present day which then doesn't really allow us to save anything for a test set for some sort
of early stopping mechanism.
Which is why it's so important to essentially do that step during the testing phase.
And because of that you should be choosing a number of epochs essentially based off this chart right
here and it looks like based off this chart we didn't have to train up to 10 epochs.
We got some sort of minimum on that validation lost around 8 epochs.
So that's what I'm going to go ahead and choose 8.
And again we're not really able to initiate an early stopping here without essentially cheating.
So that was the whole purpose of this phase right here.
They basically initiating the early stopping being satisfied by our validation loss being satisfied
by the performance of the model and then choosing that as our epochs here.
OK so we'll go ahead and run that it's going to fit our generator and I'm going to fast forward in time
until this is done fitting OK.
This is now finished training for those eight epochs.
The next step that we're going to do is forecast into the actual future.
I'm just going to copy and paste a loop.
This is the exact same loop that we did for a Test Evaluation.
The main thing to notice here is I essentially renamed forecast to test predictions and really the real
change here is this period's argument.
Previously we were only forecasting into the length of the test set which happened to be 12 months.
We can now theoretically forecast one month in the future so one period to the future 12 periods into
the future 18 periods to the future etc. The one things keep in mind however is the longer your forecast
length the more more noise you're going to introduce because essentially you're forecasting off predictions.
So you're basically adding in more and more predictions and each prediction is going to carry with it
a little bit of noise from the ground truth.
And essentially you if you try to forecast 100 years as the future it's going to be very very noisy.
So just keep that in mind that there is a limitation here.
And typically your forecast length should be the exact same length as your initial test length so it's
probably a good idea that the number of periods is going to be equal to your initial batch length because
that's really what your models designed to do.
OK so we'll go ahead and run this and again we're forecasting into the unknown future and then we're
going to invert scale are forecasting.
So say forecast dot excuse me forecast is equal to scalar that inverse transform on our forecast and
now we have our new forecast values.
So here's our original data frame going from nineteen ninety two all the way to 2019 in October.
And if we take a look now at our actual forecast these are now the next series of values.
So this is going into what is essentially 2020.
Now we don't know if these values are true or not but that's our forecast for them.
The tricky part is we want to be able to add in these values with a timestamp.
So how do we actually do this.
Luckily for us pandas has built in tools for this exact thing and we're going to build out a forecast
index.
And this is one of the main differences from our simple time series prediction on just the sine wave.
So what we're going to do is we'll create that date range index by saying PD that date range and then
we have to choose our starting date and the starting they shouldn't be the very next month off of this.
So one period into the future if you're dealing with daily data then it would be one day into the future.
But essentially what should the index value for this very first point be.
Well it should be 20 19 eleven 1.
So go ahead and say 20 19 11 0 1.
So it starts at the very next month.
And then how many periods are we actually going to predict for.
Well how many periods was this We read the find that appear as twelve.
So we just say periods is equal to periods so that makes that easy.
And then the last parameter reads to tell pandas is with what frequency should we be creating this date
range.
Because if we start at 20 19 and we want to go 12 periods into the future we to pandas.
Well what is a period is a period.
Twelve days the future.
Twelve hours twelve months etc. and we want the frequency to be a monthly start.
So the string code for that is capital M S and if you're wondering well how do we actually figure out
these string codes.
The easiest way to do it is if you actually just google search pandas frequency strings.
So here and a new tab I went ahead and search pandas frequency strings.
There is a link to the documentation but the very first link is actually a stack overflow.
So if you click on that it has the link and they're called offset aliases.
So he has the link here to the official documentation.
Well what's nice is they actually just set out a table here so we can see here that you can do weekly
frequency monthly end frequency etc. We're doing month start frequency because if you notice we're always
starting here at the first of the month.
So that's the 0 1 which means the frequency code here should be monthly start.
So you'll have to determine your frequency based off this dataset so there our forecast next.
Make sure we spell that correctly.
So we have our forecast index.
Let's go ahead and run it.
If I take a look at my forecast index now I have these points.
So it's starting at 2019 11 0 1 going all the way to October of 2020.
Now let's create a data frame that combines our forecast values with that forecast the next by saying
forecast data frame is equal to PD data frame.
That data is equal to our forecast the index is equal to that forecast index we just created.
And let's go ahead and give the columns the name forecast
forecast data frame.
And there it is.
So let's go ahead and plot these out.
So you could plot these out separately by saying forecast data frame plot and the F plot and it will
create two plots for you.
One of your original sales data and then our forecast into the future.
And if you want to see these on the same plot well you can do is you can say axes is equal to the F
plot and then just say forecast def go ahead and plot on the same axes and that will combine these plots
together onto the same plot.
And if you want to zoom in then you simply zoom in using P.L. T X limb except this time instead of passing
in a straight tick values you can actually pass on dates.
So let's go ahead and zoom in.
Starting from 2018 0 1 0 1 to the end of our dataset which was towards 2020.
So we say comma go to just go to the end of 2020.
12 01 run that and now we can see the zoom in and we can see right here that the forecast actually looks
pretty good.
And the reason there's no link here is because this is technically two separate data frames.
You could concatenate these to make them into one data frame but then pandas wouldn't color the forecast
differently from the sales data.
And this does not look totally unreasonable.
If you're just to show this is to a normal person and say this this forecast makes sense given the previous
patterns it definitely does.
It looks like pretty good.
Then the question is well how good is this forecast.
Unfortunately there's no true way of knowing that until the 20 20 months.
So the only way to truly evaluate this forecast that wasn't valuing your model on the previous test
set is to just wait it out and then basically see how well you performed in to 2020 which is basically
the whole point of forecasting there is no value you can truly compare this to that will be correct.
All right.
So that's forecasting on true time series data coming up next we'll go ahead and test your new skills
on an exercise.
I'll see you there.